>Los Angeles, 1942.
>All eyes are ona distant world war,
>but closer to homea battle is about to begin.
>A brutal murder,a sensational trial,
>a city erupts in violence.
>WOMAN:Los Angeles was like a war zone.
>MAN:The guys from the army,they got out the gun belts.
>MAN 2:All I want you to do is getone of them white guys for me.
>"Zoot Suit Riots," tonight on American Experience.
>American Experience [with captioning] is made possible
>by theAlfred P. Sloan Foundation
>to enhance public understandingof the role of technology.
>The foundation also seeks
>to portray the livesof the men and women engaged
>in scientificand technological pursuit.
>Liberty Mutual Insuranceis a proud supporter
>of The American Experience.
>And by helping people livesafer, more secure lives,
>we're also proud supportersof the American dream.
>At the Scotts Company, we helpmake gardens more beautiful,
>lawns greener, trees taller.
>If there's a better businessto be in,
>please... let us know.
>Funding for this program ismade possible by a grant from:
>American Experienceis also made possible
>by the Corporationfor Public Broadcasting
>and by contributionsto your PBS station from:
>NARRATOR:On a clear nightin August of 1942,
>a group of Mexican-Americanteenagers
>from L.A.'s 38th Street
>headed to a swimming holecalled "Sleepy Lagoon."
>Riding in the car wasHank Leyvas.
>Earlier that evening, Hank andhis girlfriend had been beaten
>by Mexican-American kidsfrom another neighborhood.
>Hank was determined to defendhis sweetheart's honor.
>As they approachedSleepy Lagoon,
>the sounds of a party filteredthrough the trees
>and Hank Leyvas thoughthe had found
>the boys he was looking for.
>HADDA BROOKS ( on recording ):♪ To spend one night with you ♪
>♪ In our old rendezvous ♪
>♪ To reminisce with you ♪
>♪ That's my desire. ♪
>♪ To dance where gypsies play ♪
>♪ And let our hearts go astray ♪
>♪ Down in that dim café ♪
>♪ That's my... ♪
>( record scratches )
>( skipping backward ):♪ Desire... desire... ♪
>♪ desire... de... ♪
>NARRATOR:The ten-minute fightat Sleepy Lagoon
>had all the markingsof a typical teenage rumble--
>except for what neighborsdiscovered later that night.
>In the light of the full moon,
>José Díaz, a 22-year-oldabout to go off to war,
>lay dying.
>He had been beaten and stabbed.
>MAN:During the summer of 1942,there had been growing concern
>about Mexican-Americanyouth crime.
>When the Sleepy Lagoon casebroke--
>when José Díaz's bodywas found--
>it came at exactlythe right moment
>for the hysteria to erupt.
>NARRATOR:In the 1940s, one Mexican-American kid killing another
>didn't attract much interestfrom authorities.
>But in wartime Los Angeles,
>José Díaz's murder would playout differently.
>The police department stormed
>the city's Mexican-Americancommunity.
>Hank Leyvas wasthe main suspect.
>The arrest and trial of Leyvas
>and others from the 38th Streetneighborhood
>raised fears that Mexican youthwere out of control.
>Within months the citywould be gripped
>by brutal racial rioting.
>Mexican Americans would pointto the riots of 1943
>as the darkest days
>of their long historyin the City of the Angels.
>NARRATOR:In 1942, the mood in the Cityof the Angels was eerie.
>The country was at war.
>On the streets, the talk wasof spies and traitors.
>Suspicions swirled aroundyoung Mexican Americans.
>Fears abounded that rebelliouskids were being manipulated
>by enemy agents.
>MAN:In the local papers,you saw often
>columns right next to eachother: Japan is doing this,
>and our local threat isthese Mexican-American youth.
>NARRATOR:Less than 100 years before,Los Angeles belonged to Mexico.
>Business was conductedin Spanish
>and streets had names like"Eternidad" and "Chapule."
>But by 1942,"Nuestra Señora de Los Angeles"
>was now simply "Los Angeles."
>And more than just the nameof the city had changed.
>"Chapule" became "Pearl Street,"
>and "Eternidad"became "Broadway."
>As Los Angeles grew,
>Mexican Americans came to beviewed as foreigners
>in a city establishedby their ancestors.
>Within 48 hoursof José Díaz's murder,
>600 young Mexican Americanswere caught in a dragnet.
>WOMAN:They picked up everybodythat was over 12 and up to 25.
>You couldn't walkout on the street,
>because they would take you.
>So the word went outin the neighborhood,
>"They're picking up everybody."
>"And it's about a fight, andit's about somebody got killed."
>Then the parents would goto the other parent
>and tell them, "Look,they're doing this and that.
>Keep the kids in the house."
>We were just peeking outthe windows
>and police were all overthe streets.
>MAN:The police did regularly harassMexican kids on the street
>because they thought of themas being the criminal element.
>If the kid looked suspicious,they would pick them up.
>If the kid looked sullenor didn't give proper respect,
>that kid could get beat upby the police.
>There are a number of instancesin which Mexican kids said,
>"You know, if you'reon the street after 8:00,
>"just be careful.
>You've got to get offthe streets."
>NARRATOR:Hank Leyvas was no strangerto the L.A.P.D.
>Leyvas was routinely picked upby police
>when the suspect of a crime wasambiguously described
>as an "unknown Mexican."
>MAN:From the perspectiveof the L.A.P.D.,
>Henry was a delinquentwith a chip on his shoulder--
>largely because he wasthe kind of kid
>who would stand upfor his rights.
>He would protestassaults upon him.
>He would protest ifhe was arrested, for example.
>He would challenge them.
>NARRATOR:By the summer of 1942,
>his life seemed headedin a new direction.
>He had enlistedin the merchant marine,
>even been issued a uniform.
>But now he was a suspectin the murder of José Díaz.
>As soon as we pulled up,
>my mother started to get outof the car
>and the police surroundedthe car,
>and they arrested my brother.
>I asked them,"Where are you taking him?"
>and they said,"To the 77th Police Station."
>NARRATOR:Decades of discrimination
>had forced the Mexican-Americancommunity to turn inward.
>By the 1940s,L.A.'s 250,000 Mexican Americans
>lived in a series of tight-knitneighborhoods called "barrios."
>The communities weretraditional, conservative
>and self-contained.
>But like many Mexican Americansof his generation,
>Hank Leyvas refused to acceptthe confines of the barrio.
>There was a different Americaoutside their neighborhood,
>and Hank and others like him
>wanted to claim a piecefor themselves.
>SANCHEZ:The tensions that arose
>from this sort of splittingof culture, is that often
>parents really saw theirchildren disappearing from them,
>from the sanctity of the barrio,from the cultural world.
>Even though physicallythey remained,
>they more often were the people
>that would venture into variousaspects of American culture.
>PAGAN:These kids spoke to each otherin English.
>And it was an English that waspunctuated by jazz phrases--
>"cool," "hip," "on time"--all of these kinds of things
>that they very clearly drewfrom the jazz culture
>during this period.
>And some of the boysfrom 38th Street will tell you
>they didn't know Spanishduring this time.
>They didn't speak Spanish.
>NARRATOR:The wartime economyput money in the kids' pockets.
>In 1942, they were spending it
>on big ballooned pants,pegged at the ankle,
>and long, baggy coats,
>a style borrowedfrom African Americans.
>It was called the "zoot suit."
>The zoot suit was everywhere.
>In the night clubs
>kids in zoot suitsruled the dance floor,
>their stoic movesthe essence of L.A. cool.
>MAN:All they'd do is getthe girl's arm like that,
tts:textAlign="right">and she'd go around him,
tts:textAlign="right">and he'd put his arm outthis way,
tts:textAlign="right">and then she'd go aroundabout three times,
>and he'd go like that,
tts:textAlign="right">because that guy wasnot going to move.
>( chuckling ):He didn't want to wrinklethe coat or nothing.
>He didn't want tomess up his pants!
>PAGAN:As soon as they would getout of the house
>they would beeline straight downto Central Avenue,
>where a lot of jazz clubs were.
>And they would go thereto listen to jazz artists
>and to dance the swingand all of these things
>that their Mexican parents wouldprobably not have approved of.
>And they found waysof sneaking around that,
>and, in fact, wearingthe zoot suit, I would say,
>was part of that.
>LEYVAS:Many times I wore my skirtjust above my knee
>till I got around the corner,
>and then I'd roll it upat the waist
>and so that it would be really short, you know.
>Then coming back from school,we'd just pull them down.
>The boys wore their pantsvery wide at the knee.
>They were always to be 40 inchesat the knees
>and ten to 11 inchesat... at the cuff,
>so they were very ballooned out,very high-waisted.
>NARRATOR:Their outrageous clothesand cocky attitudes
>shocked theirtraditional parents,
>who feared their sonsand daughters
>were becoming "pachucos."
>PAGAN:In Los Angelesin the early '40s,
>the word "pachuco" meant "punk."
>These were ill-mannered kids.
>These weren't the kids
>that you wanted your childrento hang out with.
>NARRATOR:Many white Los Angelenosfelt threatened
>by their assertive presence.
>To them, any Mexican kidin a zoot suit
>was a potential pachuco.
>PAGAN:By wearing their zoot suits
>and swaggering down the streetsin public,
>these kids defiedthe norms of segregation.
>It's hard for us to imagine,
>but to go back in the contextof the 1940s,
>when everything around youtold you, "You're not one of us.
>"You're not American, andbecause you're not American,
>"because you're not white,
>"you're supposed to remainin your neighborhoods.
>"You can't go to our clubs,
>"you can't goto our restaurants,
>you can't go to our movies,"and on and on and on.
>And of course that's going tobreed some sort of resentment.
>NARRATOR:The tension on L.A.'s streets
>was heightened by the presenceof 50,000 sailors
>looking for a way to let offsteam before heading off to war.
>SANCHEZ:Tensions between servicemen andMexican-American boys, I think,
>came from a lotof different places.
>The first place to look
>is in terms of the servicemen'sown backgrounds.
>A lot of these servicemen
>were coming from other partsof the United States.
>They had... they were notfamiliar with Mexican Americans.
>And they reallywere not accustomed
>to not only the diversityof Los Angeles,
>but the kind of interaction onewould see on the city streets.
>NARRATOR:The charged atmospheresparked frequent street battles
>between sailorsfrom the Naval Armory
>and Mexican-American boys
>from the surrounding communitycalled Chavez Ravine.
>PAGAN:Many of the Mexican-Americankids during this period
>came to terms with segregation
>by seeing their neighborhoodsas their neighborhoods.
>They resentedthe presence of whites,
>particularly,if you can imagine,
>white military personnelduring this period,
>pumped up by boot camp,ready to go out
>and lick the Japs,and lick the... the Nazis.
>NARRATOR:The sailors making their wayback from a night on the town
>had no alternative
>but to cut through a mostlyMexican-American neighborhood.
>MAN:Going down that canyonfrom the armory,
>Mexican kids would sit up thereon the side of the hill
>as we were walking downthe... the road there.
>You never wanted to get caughtby yourself as a sailor
>in... in that area,
>by... by going through that areain one single file.
>You're... you're askingfor trouble.
>You're really askingfor trouble.
>At the base, they told usto go down to the sail shop,
>and... and they sewed 13 penniesin the back of our neckerchief,
>that if any of the pachucoscame after you,
>you'd take that neckerchief offand use it as a billy club.
>13 pennies can give youquite a blow.
>And we all had that.
>NARRATOR:Each fight provided an excusefor the next.
>Sailors insultedMexican-American teenagers
>and they in turntaunted the sailors.
>( sirens blaring )
>NARRATOR:The police hadtheir own problems
>with L.A.'s Mexican youth.
>ESCOBAR:During the war years,the L.A.P.D. felt frustrated.
>They were losing their best andmost experienced police officers
>to go off into the armyand the navy, into the service.
>And in addition to that,they were faced
>with this new phenomenonof the zoot-suiters.
>You don't know how many timesyou heard
>they were going to taketheir kid gloves off
>and they were going to deal withthe zoot-suiters, harshly now--
>that they wantedto really step forward
>and deal with what they sawas this criminal element
>in a very harsh manner.
>NARRATOR:Inside the interrogation roomof the 77th Precinct,
>Hank Leyvas couldnot have imagined
>what was in store for him.
>The Sleepy Lagoon case
>was playing outlike a Hollywood movie.
>Hank was the villain.
>The ending to this storywould surprise everyone.
>NARRATOR:The arrest of Leyvas and 21other boys made front-page news.
>Hank and his friends did admitto engaging in a fight,
>but they deniedkilling José Díaz.
>They stuck to their story
>despite tough treatmentby the police.
>MAN:They put gloves on so they won'tmark their hands up, you know?
>And just whip you, just hit you,all over--
>the body, the faceand everything;
>And the legs,kick you in the legs, yeah.
>And they were tryingto get a confession.
>We got to the police station,and I went up to the counter,
>and I asked if I... we could seemy brother, Hank;
>that he had just been picked up,and what could we do?
>And the officer said...
>he looked it up,
>and he said, "Oh, yeah,"he says, "he's the leader."
>And I said, "Well, I am not sure
>"that you've gotthe right person,
>if you're calling him a leader."
>He said,"No, we know who you want."
>He says, "You want to see Hank."
>( voice breaking ):And they opened the doorand I saw my brother...
>( door slams )
>But I didn't even recognize him.
>They had him handcuffed.
>The hands were behindthe chairs.
>He had his head down.
>His lip was hangingall below... below his chin.
>And I called to him,but he didn't lift his head up.
>He just... he was knocked out.
>And he said,"Well, now you've seen him."
>NARRATOR:Hank claimed that oneof the cops who beat him
>was Chief Clem Peoples.
>The chief wasthe lead investigator
>on the Sleepy Lagoon case.
>When the largest mass trialin California history
>began in October of 1942,Peoples was there,
>building a case against Hankand the boys in the courtroom
>and writing articles aboutSleepy Lagoon in the pulp press.
>Presiding over the case wasthe Honorable Charles Fricke,
>a well-respected judgeknown as a law-and-order man.
>MAN:Dad used to talk about Frickeas a prosecutor's judge.
>Judge Fricke,according to my father,
>would take his prosecutors asideover lunch hours
>and educate themon how to introduce evidence.
>He prided himself
>in knowing criminal lawbetter than anybody.
>I think my father felt that hethought of himself as infallible
>and tended to look downat counsel
>and look down at peoplethat he didn't agree with.
>NARRATOR:Overruling objectionsfrom the defense,
>Judge Fricke sat allthe defendants together,
>isolating themfrom their lawyers.
>Since their arrest,
>the defendants had not beenallowed to get haircuts
>or clean clothes.
>Defense attorneys requested
>that the defendants be permittedto clean up.
>Their request was denied.
>The judge ruledthat the boys' appearance
>was relevant to the case.
>LEYVAS:"That's the way they are,
>that's the way they haveto be out here."
>He said, "They wear long,ducktail hair,
>and no, we're not allowing themto take haircuts."
>Nothing was allowed,
>and... so naturally,they looked really bad.
>WOMAN:The jury was lookingat the defendants,
>who sat in two rows of seatsopposite them,
>and their dislikeof the defendants was palpable.
>They did not like those peoplethey were looking at.
>NARRATOR:"Hank and the other boyslooked like vagabonds,"
>said one observer.
>LEYVAS:They were no longerthose young men
>that took their pridein their clothes.
>They didn't have that.
>NARRATOR:Only Hank Leyvas graspedthe significance of the trial.
>His convictionwould send a message
>that the city had Mexicanyouth crime under control.
>MAN:My brother Hank knew thathe was going to be the one
>that they were goingto zero in on.
>He was very awareof what was happening.
>McGRATH:Hank was cast as the villain
>because both in personalityand size,
>he was, like, largerthan... than the others.
>NARRATOR:The prosecution painted apicture of the 38th Street group
>as ruthless killers,with Hank as their leader.
>When the 38th Street kidstook the stand,
>they told a different story.
>They said they were drivingaround that night
>looking for the boys who hadattacked Hank and his girlfriend
>earlier that evening.
>HADDA BROOKS ( on recording ):♪ To dance where gypsies play ♪
>♪ And let our hearts go astray ♪
>♪ Down in that dim café... ♪
>NARRATOR:As they approached the party,
>two of the girls found José Díazlying in the shadows.
>He had been beaten and stabbed.
>PAGAN:Blood is streaming downfrom both sides of his face.
>There's blood comingalso out of his... his mouth.
>He's breathing quite...quite shallow.
>And this is when they find him--
>already unconscious,before the fight breaks out.
>NARRATOR:As the girls attended to José,
>Hank and his friendswent on the attack.
>When the brief fight broke up,
>the girls helping Joséwere pulled away.
>One of the boys spotted Díazon the ground and hit him.
>The defendants admitted that oneof their group had struck Díaz,
>but under oath, they denied anyresponsibility for his death.
>BROOKS:♪ Darling, I love you so ♪
>♪ That's my desire. ♪
>NARRATOR:Though never charged inconnection with the murder,
>the girls from 38th Streetwere portrayed in the press
>as every bit as dangerousas the boys.
>WOMAN:It was plasteredall over the papers
>that girls took partin this murderous foray
>the night that José Díazwas killed.
>And that was a huge partof the story,
>that women were actually onthe streets fighting with boys.
>NARRATOR:Eight girls were calledto testify by the prosecution.
>One after another,they refused to cooperate.
>One of them was Lorena Encinas.
>She knew who killed José Díaz,
>but she would not revealher secret.
>NARRATOR:The trial dragged onfor three months.
>Hank Leyvas's mother remainedhopeful throughout the process.
>LUPE LEYVAS:My mother always thought thatbecause her son was not guilty,
>that no matter what they do,
>at the end they're goingto be released
>because they didn't haveanything to do with the killing.
>NARRATOR:On January 12, 1943,the jury announced its verdict.
>McGRATH:When the jury came inand the verdict was read,
>the expression on the faces ofthe defendants were of horror.
>LUPE LEYVAS:The mothers were all huddledtogether there,
>and I was there with them.
>Most of themdidn't speak English.
>There was, I think,only two that spoke English.
>So we were quickly tryingto translate to them
>what had happened.
>NARRATOR:17 defendants were found guilty.
>Hank Leyvas was sentencedto life.
>RUDY LEYVAS:Hank had kind of expectedthat they would be found guilty.
>And he picked his head up,
>where a lot of them just droppedtheir head down
>and... and looking to the....to the floor.
>But he just picked his head up,like he knew this was coming.
>My brother Hank knewwhat was going to come.
>YNOSTROZA:Some of the guys were in tears,you know.
>And me and Hank Leyvaswould tell them,
>"Buckle up, you suckers,you men.
>Be a man, stop crying,"you know.
>( chuckles )
>And we were hurting, too,you know,
>but we weren'ttrying to show it.
>We were trying to be machosand all that,
>but a lot of guys were crying.
>NARRATOR:The boys were sentto San Quentin prison,
>400 miles from home.
>They weren't the only oneswho would do time.
>The girls from 38th Streetwere taken from their families
>and made wards of the state.
>In a legal process that providedneither jury nor trial,
>they were sent awayto an infamous reform school.
>ESCOBEDO:The Ventura School for Girls,at this time,
>is really a veryrepressive institution--
>one that's custodial,
>and disciplinary procedurescompletely rival
>the state prisons of the time.
>Young women would goto very drastic measures
>in order to escape goingto the Ventura School for Girls
>because of its bad reputation.
>There were womenat the juvenile hall
>who knew that they were goingto be ultimately sentenced
>to the Ventura School
>and they were swallowingsafety pins the night before
>in order to get out of it.
>NARRATOR:With the secret she held, LorenaEncinas could have made a deal.
>But she refused.
>MAN:My mother's reasonfor being there
>was for the mere reason
>that she failed to cooperatewith the courts
>and divulge the informationthat they wanted her to...
>to name all the namesof the people involved.
>NARRATOR:During all the time she servedat Ventura,
>Lorena kept details aboutJosé Díaz's murder to herself.
>While the 38th Street boysdid time in San Quentin,
>prominent Los Angelenos wereworking to get them released.
>Believing the boys had beenrailroaded,
>Communists, intellectualsand Hollywood celebrities,
>like Orson Welles and RitaHayworth, lent their names
>to the newly formedSleepy Lagoon Defense Committee.
>I went tothe Beverly Hills Hotel;
>they said I had to go speak.
>She says, "Bring some clothes,we'll pick you up."
>Well, I went as I dressed,with my knee-high white socks
>and my very short black skirt.
>They picked me up and we wentto Rita Hayworth's house.
>And Rita Hayworth said,"No, no, you can't wear that.
>You can get one of my dresses."
>And my first formal belongedto Rita Hayworth.
>NARRATOR:Political activists also joinedthe cause.
>McGRATH:We had professional people,
>we had educators,
>we had, um, we had congressmen,
>we had a lot of union people.
>NARRATOR:The committee's effortsto portray the defendants
>as innocent victims paid off.
>Money to fund an appeal came infrom across the country.
>Prominent members of thecommittee visited the boys
>to reassure themthey would not be forgotten.
>YNOSTROZA:And Anthony Quinn told us,"Don't worry.
>"We're going to beat thison appeal.
>Yeah, you were railroaded."
>And he says,"I'm behind you guys."
>NARRATOR:In the months following thetrial, the city grew more tense.
>Skirmishes between sailorsand zoot-suiters became
>a daily occurrence.
>WOMAN:The pachucos would intimidatepeople.
>They would walk down the street,five abreast,
>and if you walked around them,
>they would laugh or sticktheir hand out and hit you.
>After a while, you got so you'dgo down the side streets
>instead of confronting them.
>A lot of them were from Mexico.
>They didn't speak English.
>They didn't adhere to our laws.
>They weren't even geared upfor the war effort.
>NARRATOR:On June 3, 1943,the city exploded.
>PAGAN:As a group of service personnelwere passing
>a group of civilian youth,one young man raised his hand
>in a manner that one of thesailors thought was threatening.
>One of the sailors turned around
>and grabbed the armof a young civilian,
>and from that pointthe fight broke out.
>It seemed that both sides wereprimed for confrontation,
>and the street seemed to explodein a fight.
>In the process, the sailor hadhis jaw broken,
>he was knocked unconscious
>and his buddies had to drag himback to the armory.
>NARRATOR:Later that night,
>a group of sailorsarmed with belts and clubs
>left the naval armoryand headed downtown.
>The Zoot Suit Riots had begun.
>BRAY:We had a, uh,a commanding officer.
>And he told the guys,he said, "Okay, men."
>He said, "We've had it."
>So he... so the guysfrom the armory,
>they got out the gun belts andwrapped them around their hands
>and down they went,cleaned up town.
>I was in the theater downtownand watching a movie.
>All of a suddenthe lights went on,
>and you hear a lot of noise,commotion,
>a lot of guys yellingor something.
>Now you turn aroundand you see these servicemen
>beating the heckout of all these Mexicans.
>WOMAN:And there was a fight,not just with fisticuffs,
>but some of them had chains.
>So what I did isI dived underneath the counter
>and stayed there
>and, you know, protected myselfbecause it became very wild.
>It was like a movie set.
>NARRATOR:Among the victims in the theaterwere 12- and 13-year-old boys,
>beaten by American servicemen
>because of the clothesthey wore.
>I know a lot of themcame back happy;
>a lot of the guys,the Americans--
>they came back happy.
>NARRATOR:The following night,
>hundreds of sailors tookthe fight beyond downtown
>and into the heart of L.A.'soldest Mexican neighborhood.
>SANCHEZ:The servicemen would crossthe river
>and head into communitieslike Boyle Heights,
>and then other partsof East Los Angeles
>to seek outMexican-American youth
>that were no longer ending upin downtown Los Angeles
>at theaters and bars.
>So as the riotplayed itself out,
>there had to be a lot moresort of search and destroy--
>to use a military metaphor.
>And that's where you get
>the real movementinto East Los Angeles.
>NARRATOR:Once in the barrio, sailorsbroadened their attack
>beyond Mexican boysin zoot suits.
>Any Mexican in their path wasa potential target.
>SANCHEZ:The way the riots developed
>is very much attached to whatthe notion of a zoot-suiter was.
>The notion of a zoot-suiterwas always racialized,
>even though Mexicans were not
>the only peoplewearing zoot suits.
>So a riot that first was aimingat individuals
>because of their dress, becomesa more expansive sort of riot,
>aimed at a particular racialpopulation: Mexican Americans.
>NARRATOR:It didn't take long for the kidsfrom the barrios to organize
>and fight back.
>RUDY LEYVAS:There was an alleybehind this theater
>and a lot right next to it.
>And it was just jammed.
>So we was waiting,it was already getting dark.
>So then about 20 or 30 guyscome out in the street
>so that when the sailors come,they could see them.
>And as soon as they wentout there
>here comes those truckloads,
>truckloads of sailorsand civilians.
>And they let out a cry, "Therethey are, there they are!"
>And they came in.
>Well, as they came in,
>once they got all the way in,we all came out.
>I, myself, had a batand I used it.
>And there was people hurton both sides.
>SANETTI:We were fisticuffing, you know,
>and kicking and bitingand scratching.
>And I got a couple of good blowsthat knocked me down.
>They took me back to the base
>and put me in sick bayovernight.
>And the next morning I wentback to doing my normal duties.
>But I had two good shiners.
>At nighttime they came.
>At nighttime, right?
>So we just disappear, right?
>Disappear.
>But then we found out
>that the best thing to doto get even with them
>is watch themon Whittier Boulevard,
>and when there was fouror five guys riding in a car,
>and we would follow them
>until they had to cometo the boulevard and stop
>and there'd be another carin front of them.
>We would run out there,open one door
>and start pounding the hellout of the driver's door
>and get him out.
>And then beat the hellout of the other guys, right?
>NARRATOR:On the fifth day of the riots,
>5,000 civilians showed upto assist the sailors.
>LEE:My brother was only14 years old.
>I was 16 at the time,but I did drive.
>And we got my mother's car
>and we went to El Toroand picked up marines.
>Los Angeles was like a war zone
>and we had to do somethingabout it.
>The pachucos had justtaken over.
>I felt that I was doing my sharefor the war effort.
>NARRATOR:The kids fighting the sailorswere not entirely on their own.
>RUDY LEYVAS:There's this man I never knew,I never seen him before.
>And he says, "Are you guyscoming to fight sailors?"
>And I says, "Yeah."
>And he said, "I have a car here,it's full of gas."
>And at that time the gas wasrationed.
>"Take it, use it.
>"When you get through,just leave the keys in it,
>put it anyplace on CentralAvenue and I'll pick it up."
>And he says,"All I want you to do
>is get one of them white guysfor me."
>NARRATOR:By week's end,
>the Zoot Suit Riots were makingheadlines across the country.
>Thousands of marines, soldiersand sailors
>from as far away as Las Vegas
>arrived in the Cityof the Angels,
>itching to clean up the town.
>Mexican-American kidswere overwhelmed.
>In a ritual repeatedacross the city,
>servicemen stripped themof their clothes
>and burnt the garmentson the streets.
>PAGAN:The L.A.P.D. hangs back duringthis entire confrontation--
>about a week of rioting--
>never taking the offensivein trying to stop the riot,
>and only showing up
>after the rioting servicemenhave swept through an area.
>And they show up only to arrestthe victims of riot
>and throw them into jail.
>SANETTI:The shore patrol would naturallycome out right away,
>because they were patrollinglike regular policemen.
>And they'd cometo break up a fight
>and they'd take these pachucos--
>if they could catch them,if they didn't run away--
>you know, they'd catch themand throw them in the jeep
>and put them in the paddy wagonand take them to jail.
>With the sailors, they'd put usin the jeep,
>take us a couple of blocks away
>and tell us to get back to ourship or get back to the station.
>None of the sailorsever got arrested.
>You tell me one of the sailorsthat got arrested
>for beating the hellout of somebody, huh?
>SANCHEZ:Within four or five days,L.A. officials realize
>this could move usout of control--
>out of controlin a wartime society.
>It could, in fact,lead to much greater problems
>if servicemen kept disobeyingtheir superiors
>and going downinto these communities.
>And that's why it stops.
>NARRATOR:On June 8, 1943,military authorities,
>in consultationwith civic leaders,
>declared the city off-limitsto servicemen.
>The rioting endedsoon afterwards.
>NARRATOR:The following day, the citycouncil adopted a resolution
>banning the wearingof zoot suits on L.A. streets.
>Wearing the suit in publicwas punishable
>by a 30-day jail term.
>NARRATOR:Stores that sold the suits
>quickly moved to distancethemselves from the style
>that had becomea symbol of rebellion.
>SANCHEZ:Mexican-American youth, I think,were taught in World War II
>that they could not simplychoose by themselves
>the way that theywould express themselves;
>they simply couldn't choosewhat they could wear;
>they simply couldn't choosewho they could be;
>that this was not a society
>that allowed for that kindof freedom of expression
>for these particular youth.
>And that's a verypainful lesson.
>It's a very painful lesson
>when one hears the rhetoricof "Americans all,"
>the rhetoricof American promise--
>open to all sorts of immigrants,all sorts of people.
>NARRATOR:As the riots subsided, thegovernor ordered the creation
>of a citizens committee.
>Its charge was to investigateand determine
>the cause of the riots.
>Ironically, prison life hadsheltered the 38th Street boys
>from the worst mob violencein Los Angeles history.
>With Hollywood starsstill working on their behalf,
>the kids got special treatment.
>YNOSTROZA:We used to havewhat the guards used to eat.
>Their food, not prison food-- their food.
>You know, steaks, pork chops,milk, ice cream, cake.
>Everything.
>NARRATOR:Unlike the other boys, HankLeyvas refused to play along.
>His resistance to authorityearned him a stint
>at California's dreadedFolsom Prison.
>The locking of the doors,he wrote,
>left him with a lonesome,empty feeling.
>"You are standing upto the iron door,
>"waiting for the guard tocome along and take the count.
>"Listening as his footstepsfade away in the distance,
>you realize that you are alone."
>( slamming door echoes )
>NARRATOR:As the months passed, Leyvasgrew increasingly resentful.
>Finally, in November of 1943,
>defense attorneysfiled an appeal
>with the CaliforniaSecond District Court
>claiming their clientshad been denied a fair trial.
>A year passed beforea decision was handed down.
>By this time, Hank andthe others had been locked up
>for more than two years.
>McGRATH:I sent a telegram to San Quentin
>care of Henry Leyvas,to tell all the guys,
>saying "Appeal successful..."
>I've forgotten what else it said
>but I know that it ended,"Oh, what a wonderful morning."
>YNOSTROZA:We couldn't believe it at first.
>You know what I mean, like,it was like a shock.
>And one of the guys told me,
>he says, you know, this guy'sgot a barrel of homemade brew
>buried in the ground.
>And we felt like celebrating,you know.
>So we dug it up
>and we got drunk that nightin the barracks over there.
>And the officers came,you know--
>well, they weren't officers,they were like supervisors--
>and the head guy, the warden,told them,
>"As long as theydon't fight nobody, you know,
>"and don't cause no problem,leave them alone.
>Leave them alone."
>You know, and we drankthat whole barrel.
>Yeah.
>NARRATOR:In October of 1944
>Hank Leyvas and the other boyswere set free.
>Ever-defiant,Hank Leyvas walked out
>of the Los Angeles Hallof Justice wearing a zoot suit.
>The court ruled
>that Judge Fricke had committedserious errors in the trial
>and threw out the verdict,
>but the court did not clearthe 38th Street boys
>of the murder charge.
>Although L.A. authoritiesdeclined to retry the case,
>the Sleepy Lagoon murder hauntedHank and the others for life.
>LUPE LEYVAS:It stopped himfrom going in the service,
>which is the thingthat he wanted so bad.
>He'd already signedinto the merchant marine.
>He'd already had a trial run.
>And he was in uniform.
>And, um... and it didn't happen.
>All this happened and itjust broke his... his future.
>NARRATOR:José Díaz was dead, and hiskiller got away with murder.
>Those who had informationweren't talking in 1942.
>WOMAN:My mom did know whothe murderer of José Díaz was
>but she kept it to herself.
>And she refused to cooperatewith the authorities.
>NARRATOR:Decades passedbefore the truth emerged.
>Toward the end of her life,
>Lorena Encinas at lastshared her secret
>about Sleepy Lagoon.
>TORRES-PRESTON:My mother admitted to me
>that the reason that she keptthat secret from the authorities
>was that it washer brother Louie
>who was involved in the murder.
>She kept it to herself becauseshe was not the type of person
>that would snitch,so to speak, on anyone else.
>And she also was tryingto protect my Uncle Louie.
>NARRATOR:Lorena claimed that her brotherLouie was at the party
>before the 38th Street kidsarrived...
>but had been thrown outfor causing problems.
>Later that night
>as José Díaz and two companionsleft the party,
>they were met by an angryLouie Encinas and his friends.
>In the fight that followed,
>José Díaz was stabbedand left to die.
>A short time later
>Hank Leyvas and his friendsarrived at the party.
>Louie Encinas was picked up
>in the dragnet followingthe Sleepy Lagoon murder
>but was let go by police.
>Years later,Encinas committed suicide.
>In 1943,the citizens' committee
>investigating the Zoot SuitRiots issued its report.
>It condemned the role playedby the press and by the L.A.P.D.
>and determined race to bea central cause of the riots.
>At the same time, the mayorcame to his own conclusion.
>"The riots," he said, "werecaused by juvenile delinquents."
>"Race was not a factor."
>The Sleepy Lagoon DefenseCommittee was powerless
>to help the 38th Street girls.
>They remained wards ofthe California Youth Authority
>until they reached21 years of age.
>Lorena Encinas died in 1991.
>As Hank Leyvas and the otherboys walked out of prison,
>a guard remarked,"They'll be back."
>He was right.
>Hank Leyvas and manyof the other boys
>grew tragically familiarwith prison life.
>Hank, the symbolic zoot-suiter,died in an East L.A. bar
>in 1971.
>The Sleepy Lagoon murderremains officially unsolved.
>There's moreabout the Zoot Suit Riots
>at American Experience Online.
>Explore zoot style and music,dancing and clothes
>and read letters the SleepyLagoon boys wrote from prison.
>All this and moreat PBS Online.
>To order "Zoot Suit Riots"on videocassette
><NO VIDEO><VIDEO OK>:;<NO VIDEO:
>to enhance public understandingof the role of technology.
>The foundation also seeks
>to portray the livesof the men and women engaged
>in scientificand technological pursuit.
>At the Scotts Company, we helpmake gardens more beautiful,
>lawns greener, trees taller.
>If there's a better businessto be in,
>please... let us know.
>Liberty Mutual Insuranceis a proud supporter
>of The American Experience.
>And by helping people livesafer, more secure lives,
>we are also proud supportersof the American dream.
>Funding for this program ismade possible by a grant from:
>American Experienceis also made possible
>by the corporationfor Public Broadcasting
>and by contributionsto your PBS station from: